Add docs for OpenTelemetry system packages on Linux hosts (#11193)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/platforms/linux/_index.md

---
title: OpenTelemetry on Linux hosts
linkTitle: Linux
description:
  Install OpenTelemetry as a system package to automatically instrument the
  applications running on a Linux host.
weight: 250
cSpell:ignore: metapackage
---

Setting up OpenTelemetry usually depends on where your applications run. Some
environments are highly automated, such as
[Kubernetes](/docs/platforms/kubernetes/), thanks to the OpenTelemetry Operator,
or [Functions as a Service](/docs/platforms/faas/) with the OpenTelemetry Lambda
layers. But many Java, .NET, Node.js, and Python applications run directly on
Linux hosts, where instrumenting them has traditionally meant downloading agents
by hand and wiring up environment variables yourself.

The
[OpenTelemetry Packaging SIG](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-packaging)
provides **system packages** that make OpenTelemetry a dependency of the host
itself. After installing a single package and restarting your applications, the
Java, .NET, Node.js, and Python processes on the host are automatically
instrumented and start emitting telemetry.

> ## How it works

Reviewer: We should mention with a forward-looking sentence the goal to also deliver OpenTelemetry eBPF Instrumentation (OBI) as a system package, which would extend zero-code instrumentation to Go and other runtimes beyond what language-agent injection covers. Something like the following at the end of "How it works" or in "Status and limitations":

> The Packaging and OBI SIGs also plans to deliver OpenTelemetry eBPF Instrumentation as a system package, extending zero-code instrumentation to additional runtimes.

> The `opentelemetry` package is a metapackage that bundles:

Reviewer: The word "bundles" implies a monolithic package; the `opentelemetry` metapackage
actually pulls in separate packages as dependencies. "The OpenTelemetry SDKs and
auto-instrumentation" is also slightly misleading — these are distinct installable
packages, not a single SDK bundle.

**Suggested edit:**

```suggestion
The `opentelemetry` package is a metapackage that depends on:
```

environments are highly automated, such as
[Kubernetes](/docs/platforms/kubernetes/), thanks to the OpenTelemetry Operator,
or [Functions as a Service](/docs/platforms/faas/) with the OpenTelemetry Lambda
layers. But many Java, .NET, Node.js, and Python applications run directly on
Linux hosts, where instrumenting them has traditionally meant downloading agents
by hand and wiring up environment variables yourself.

The
[OpenTelemetry Packaging SIG](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-packaging)
provides **system packages** that make OpenTelemetry a dependency of the host
itself. After installing a single package and restarting your applications, the
Java, .NET, Node.js, and Python processes on the host are automatically
instrumented and start emitting telemetry.

## How it works

The `opentelemetry` package is a metapackage that depends on:

- The
  [OpenTelemetry Injector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-injector),
  which configures the dynamic linker so that supported runtimes load the
  matching auto-instrumentation when a process starts.
- The language-specific auto-instrumentation packages for Java, .NET, Node.js,
  and Python.

> Once installed, the injector adds the auto-instrumentation to every new process

Reviewer: "New process" is a bit obscure: "new started process" maybe?

> of a supported runtime on the host. Applications that were already running are

Reviewer: The injector is added to all the nelky-started, dynamically-linked processes. It just has no visible effect on the ones we have no SDKs for.

instrumented after they are restarted. By default, telemetry is exported using
OTLP to `localhost` on ports `4317` (gRPC) and `4318` (HTTP), so you typically

> run a local [OpenTelemetry Collector](/docs/collector/) to receive and forward

Reviewer: Should link to the opentelemetry-collector-release process to get system packages for the collector, and our issue there to integrate the collector in the system package repository

it.

The Packaging and OBI SIGs also plan to deliver
[OpenTelemetry eBPF Instrumentation](/docs/zero-code/obi/) as a system package,

> extending zero-code instrumentation to additional runtimes such as Go.

Reviewer: Go, Rust and C++
